“But it will perhaps come as a surprise to learn than Epicureanism, 
usually considered the philosophy of pleasure, gives just as prominent 
a place as Stoicism to precise practices which are nothing other than 
spiritual exercises. The reason for this is that, for Epicurus just as 
much as for the Stoics, philosophy is a therapeutics: "We must concern 
ourselves with the healing of our own lives." 59 In this context, 
healing consists in bringing one's soul back from the worries of life 
to the simple joy of existing. People's unhappiness, for the Epicureans, 
comes from the fact that they are afraid of things which are not to be 
feared, and desire things which it is not necessary to desire, and which 
are beyond their control. Consequently, their life is consumed in worries 
over unjustified fears and unsatisfied desires. As a result, they are 
deprived of the only genuine pleasure there is: the pleasure of existing. 
This is why Epicurean physics can liberate us from fear: it can show us 
that the gods have no effect on the progress of the world and that death, 
being complete dissolution, is not a part of life.60 Epicurean ethics: 
Epicurean, as deliverance from desires can deliver us from our insatiable 
desires, by distinguishing between desires which are both natural and 
necessary, desires which are natural but not necessary, and desires which 
are neither natural nor necessary. It is enough to satisfy the first 
category of desires, and give up the last - and eventually the second as 
well - in order to ensure the absence of worries." and to reveal the sheer 
joy of existing: "The cries of the flesh are: 'Not to be hungry', 'not to 
be thirsty', 'not to be cold'. For if one enjoys the possession of this, 
and the hope of continuing to possess it, he might rival even Zeus in 
happiness." 62 This is the source of the feeling of gratitude, which one 
would hardly have expected, which illuminates what one might call Epicurean 
piety towards all things: "Thanks be to blessed Nature, that she has made 
what is necessary easy to obtain, and what is riot easy unnecessary." 
-Excerpt From: Hadot. “Philosophy as a way of life”

“Ideally, art would give us the answers that other people don’t. This might 
even be one of the main points of literature: to tell us what society at 
large is too prudish to explore. The important books should be those that 
leave us wondering, with relief and gratitude, how the author could possibly 
have known so much about our lives.”
-Excerpt From: Alain de Botton. “The Course of Love: A Novel.”

Even though you try to put people under control, it is impossible. You cannot 
do it. The best way to control people is to encourage them to be mischievous. 
Then they will be in control in a wider sense. To give your sheep or cow a 
large spacious meadow is the way to control him. So it is with people: first 
let them do what they want, and watch them. This is the best policy. To 
ignore them is not good. That is the worst policy. The second worst is trying 
to control them. The best one is to watch them, just to watch them, without 
trying to control them.
-Shunryu Suzuki

“…to let no day pass without discussing goodness and all the other subjects 
about which you hear me talking and examining both myself and others is really 
the very best thing that a man can do, and that life without this sort of 
examination is not worth living”
 -Socrates

“It is a serious thing to live in a society of possible gods and goddesses, 
to remember that the dullest most uninteresting person you can talk to may 
one day be a creature which,if you saw it now, you would be strongly tempted 
to worship, or else a horror and a corruption such as you now meet, if at all, 
only in a nightmare. All day long we are, in some degree helping each other 
to one or the other of these destinations. It is in the light of these 
overwhelming possibilities, it is with the awe and the circumspection proper 
to them, that we should conduct all of our dealings with one another, all 
friendships, all loves, all play, all politics. There are no ordinary people. 
You have never talked to a mere mortal. Nations, cultures, arts, civilizations 
- these are mortal, and their life is to ours as the life of a gnat. But it is 
immortals whom we joke with, work with, marry, snub, and exploit - immortal 
horrors or everlasting splendors.”
-Excerpt From: C.S. Lewis “The Weight of Glory”

Our deepest fear is not that we are inadequate. Our deepest fear is that we 
are powerful beyond measure. It is our light, not our darkness, that most 
frightens us. Your playing small does not serve the world. There is nothing 
enlightened about shrinking so that other people won't feel insecure around 
you. We were all meant to shine as children do. It's not just in some of us; 
it’s in everyone. And as we let our own light shine, we unconsciously give 
other people permission to do the same. As we are liberated from our own fear, 
our presence automatically liberates others.
-Marianne Williamson


Tempest-tossed souls, wherever ye may be, under whatsoever conditions ye may 
live, know this, - in the ocean of life the isles of Blessedness are smiling, 
and the sunny shore of your ideal awaits your coming. Keep your hand firmly 
upon the helm of thought. In the barque (masted ship) of your soul reclines 
the commanding Master. He does but sleep: wake Him. Self-control is strength, 
Right Thought is mastery, Calmness is power. Say unto your heart, “Peace, be 
still!”
-Excerpt From: James Allen. “As a Man Thinketh”


“He who knows only his own side of the case knows little of that. His reasons 
may be good, and no one may have been able to refute them. But if he is equally 
unable to refute the reasons on the opposite side, if he does not so much as 
know what they are, he has no ground for preferring either opinion... Nor is 
it enough that he should hear the opinions of adversaries from his own teachers, 
presented as they state them, and accompanied by what they offer as refutations. 
He must be able to hear them from persons who actually believe them...he must 
know them in their most plausible and persuasive form.” 
-JS Mill

